Welcome everybody.
Well, if even the voice of
God can't botch my name,
I really have to change it.
I am Francois Jouaux.
I'm the
Java Technologies Engineering Manager and
we have
a fun-packed session this morning,
so we'll start right along.
The agenda we are going to cover today is
the state of the art of Java on Mac OS X.
Answer some common Java questions.
talk about Java SE 6
which is fast coming,
and finally cover
IDE support on the platform.
What I would like you to do by
the end of this session is to keep
on attending the Java sessions.
They are mostly bright and
early at 9:00 AM in the morning,
so why not take a little,
put a little bit of Java in your morning
routine so Cocoa can wait for later.
Use new Java SE technologies on IDEs.
And after leaving W3C,
keep telling the world how strong
the Java community is on Mac OS X.
So to keep you awake,
I have this new button popping up here
and there that will indicate that we have
exciting features on almost every slide.
Exciting new features
on almost every slide.
And I used to have a jingle,
but I guess no sound.
Who is it for?
Let's have a show of hands here.
We have students in this room.
A few researchers, scientists,
seasoned Java developers,
that makes the bulk of it.
And we're all striving to
build consumer products,
whether you are all consumers and you're
building either websites for consumers
or shrink-wrapped Java applications.
But the consumer is always in your mind.
Why is Mac OS X the best Java platform?
We believe this is the most
tightly integrated Java in any OS.
We keep the Java lean and fit.
Java on Mac OS X is very
tight to the underlying OS,
the core frameworks.
And we like it this way,
and that's what this
session will be about.
On the contrary, on Windows,
I think you see where I'm getting there,
Java is bloated and inconsistent.
You have to carry your
Java version with you.
If you want to shrink
wrap an application,
you have to instruct your customer to
go and download the latest security
fixes or the latest packages from Sun.
Otherwise,
your application will not work.
We don't like this and we
won't follow this model.
So as a summary,
every consumer has the right
version of Java in their OS.
It's bundled, pre-installed,
and continually updated through the
automated software update system.
Every developer also has
integrated SDK tools that
work with Java and excellent
documentation at their fingertips.
Other bundle extensions
are JAI on Java 3D,
Live Connect, and Web Start,
which is fast becoming the best way to
deploy applications on other platforms.
And we support it as well on Mac OS X.
In the enterprise,
I want you to check out the
new Java server options that
are coming with Leopard,
and we'll talk more about them later.
And for development and deployment,
we include a set of very powerful tools,
WebObjects,
which is our own application server,
Apache Tomcat, and JBoss.
These are all pure Java project tools.
Ease of use and flexibility.
Again, your system is pre-configured
with a default Java,
but it also has legacy
versions of Java bundled.
And through a preferences application,
you can switch back and forth.
You will never be able to override the
developer's choice in the application,
but for your applets and
for your Java command line,
you can do so.
To paraphrase someone well known,
this is Unix Java with taste.
We make all the Java command line tools
available at their correct Unix location.
and I forgot we have
bundled IDEs and tools,
Xcode, Shark,
and new X-Ray and D-Trace from Sun.
X-Ray from Apple, D-Trace from Sun.
Quality, compatibility, and performance.
The Java team has fixed more
than 1,800 bugs this year.
So I'd like to applaud the
Java team and their manager,
but they deserve some credit.
This is much more than last year
and we're running out of bugs fast,
so we need your help.
We go beyond the Java compatibility kit.
We are in constant discussion with
SANS engineers regarding unwritten specs.
We are always striving to make
Mac OS X Java behave as well as,
behave much like Windows Java,
but keeping all look and feel.
And this is a very,
very tight line to work on.
We have an enhanced in-house
regression test suite based on JUnit.
And the reason I mentioned this
is that if you provide your own
JUnit test in your bug reports,
you have good chances that
we will incorporate them.
And we will never regress
on any of your bug files.
The number of critical applications
that are based on Java on
Mac OS X keeps increasing.
With Leopard,
we expect to have more than 72 of them.
And this is a great progress,
and it shows that Java on the
desktop is alive and strong.
Performance.
Is it fast enough?
Well, when Tiger shipped,
this was the fastest
Java we had ever shipped.
When Leopard will ship,
it will still be true.
We are making great
progress in performance.
And we now have really a good
apples-to-apples way of comparing Java.
We can run Windows on Bootcamp,
run Java on Mac OS X and on Bootcamp,
and we can really see the exact
performance of our frameworks.
Let's take an example.
This is straight out of our labs.
The SciMark scientific benchmark
is well known in the industry.
It's used to benchmark the
Java performance for both
software and hardware.
And you can see that we've been making
progress on our hardware since Java 5.
Java SE 6 client is already much
faster than a J2 SE 5 client.
What's interesting is the server version.
It's now much, much faster than anything
we have had in the past,
and it's 20% better than the
currently published number.
Mac OS X has never been
better than rank number 10.
If we were to ship today,
it would be rank number
1 with a 20% margin.
So imagine what's going to
happen when we ship tomorrow.
Similarly, startup times are improving.
Two very large applications that
take a very long time to start
up are IntelliJ IDEA and Eclipse.
They both used to start
between 12 and 20 seconds,
depending whether you were
running with the client
compiler or the server compiler.
Today on the new hardware,
they are at five seconds.
And the gap between the client compiler
and the server compiler is shrinking.
And this goes in the direction
that we're taking to try to merge
the two technologies together.
And this is a goal
that Sun is working on.
We have always lagged in alias drawing.
On Mac OS X,
everything is anti-aliased and
we are very performant there.
But on Windows,
Java is drawn with alias graphics.
And when we compare
all drawing on Windows,
Windows drawing to all drawing,
if we are fair,
we should compare graphics
alias and we are lagging.
With the new OpenGL pipeline,
we've made great progress.
The OpenGL pipeline will be
available in Java SE 6 and it's
coming from Sun on leveraging the
OpenGL libraries available on Mac OS X.
Let's answer some common Java questions.
So these are questions that are
recurring on our Java dev mailing list,
and I'd like to close
them once and for all.
I'd like to prove that
we are listening to you.
Very often we get, well,
every time we have a new release,
we get asked, can we get Java previews
on a shipping OS?
This year we've listened to you,
and Java SE 6 previews have been
made available on Mac OS X Tiger as
soon as we started working on them.
Today I'm happy to announce that
we'll have a new developer preview.
If it's not available yet, yes it is,
live, at this minute.
Go ahead and download it.
It's packed with the OpenGL pipeline
and all the goodies from Sun.
And it's also available
on the Leopard DVD.
I'd like to take this opportunity
to thank you because your testing
and your feedback has provided us
more than 180 great bugs to work on.
How long will it take to
fix the bugs I just filed?
For a lot of us,
the Apple bug reporting process
is a lot like a black hole,
a lot of you.
We know this is not true.
All bugs are screened within 48 hours.
And out of these 1,800 bugs
that we have fixed last year,
a third were developer-originated
and were fixed.
And that represents 75% of the bugs
that were originated by you last year.
So some bugs may take longer than others,
but on average, we do not sit more
than 100 days on a bug.
And it used to be like 200
days in the previous year.
So we are making great progress there.
Our time to release,
or at least to developer release,
is much faster.
When is the next Java coming?
So as soon as Sun comes up with their
pre-alpha version of Java SE 20,
we are asked to provide it.
And we are following, indeed,
some releases of Java IC6 Beta and
other Java updates very closely.
We cannot worry just
about the latest Java.
We have to go back on 1.3, 1.4, 1.5,
and on all the OS we still support.
The state of the art on Tiger is
that Java 1.3.1 is duplicated,
and for Java 1.4 and J2SE5,
we are very close to the latest
updates available from Sun.
And Java ICC 6 previews are at beta 88,
which is as well a few points
behind the latest beta.
How do I make the latest
Java the default on my system?
So this question accompanies--
is always coming after developers
install a developer preview.
They want to take advantage of it
or stop taking advantage of it.
And again, I talked about this earlier,
we have an updated Java preferences
application that lets you specify
the default Java for applets,
command lines, and applications.
There is no more mucking
around with symlink,
copying around current JDK directories,
and so on.
It's clean, easy, and it's foolproof.
And the UI hasn't changed,
it still has the same location,
so it's just more powerful.
Why isn't Apple's
Java as stable as Sun's?
We're working hard to
correct this misconception.
Only 35 bugs were filed on J2SE 5
since the April 2006 release.
In April 2006, J2SE 5 became the
default Java on Mac OS X.
It's been four months,
35 bugs have been filed.
Anybody wants to guess
how many downloads we had?
6.5 million downloads.
6.5 million people suffered through 45
megabyte download on a slow connection.
They used Java and didn't
find anything to report.
It's very cool.
Everything I've tried
has worked very well.
Congratulations to the team.
Someone we really liked sent
us an email about J2SE 6 DP1s.
And all indication is that even
our first DP was very stable.
And this person is James Gosling.
And I'd like to welcome him on
stage to say this by himself.
Hi, Francois.
Thanks for inviting me up.
He also asked me to show off
a few things in NetBeans.
And so if we can get my screen up here.
Can I have my screen up?
Hello.
Thank you.
So this is NetBeans.
This is the tool that I've been helping
out with for the last several years.
I'm sort of the CTO of
the Java organization,
which means I kind of
get to kibitz a lot.
I don't actually get to work.
I just get to kibitz.
But this is my favorite toy
to play with these days.
And it's a very nice little IDE.
It's got all kinds of little eye candy.
And one of my favorite little hacks
from lately is this little navigator,
which is kind of a scroll bar that
gives you a fisheye lens version.
And the interesting thing about
this is that various people have
done sort of fisheye lens viewers,
where they sort of Greek the
text by drawing little lines.
This one doesn't do that.
This one actually draws the text.
All the little gray things you see
are the text drawn really small.
And so this is actually drawing the
entire text document over and over again.
And so you can see how unbelievably
fast text rendering is on this thing,
because it's repainting the whole
document at every slide of the mouse.
And it's actually quite smooth.
It lets me get around very quickly.
uh...
[Transcript missing]
You know,
it's got all the sort of inline help.
It even has inline Java doc
that sort of pops up.
You can do things like, you know,
as your-- you know,
you can set breakpoints,
and you can run things.
One of the things that we do--
is, is, is, we actually bundle all the,
all the enterprise facilities
together at the same time.
So this is actually just
deploying to Tomcat,
starting up Tomcat,
and thank you very much.
and the Tomcat Ghost Blat.
Oh no, sorry.
I got a brain of a duck.
It hit the breakpoint.
So you see all the displays
of the HTTP requests,
and I can... I'll delete the breakpoint.
I'd forgotten that I had started
this guy a little bit strangely.
So let's just sort of continue
out of that and get back.
and you can see how it was, you know,
it's actually been, you know,
booted this thing up.
The ability to do remote debugging
in NetBeans is a really nice feature,
particularly of deployed app servers.
Right now I'm using Tomcat,
but there's about half a dozen
different app servers that it
supports that you can deploy and
control and all the rest of it.
One of the demos that I wanted
to be able to show was doing
remote debugging on cell phones.
There's a lot of facilities
in NetBeans that are all about
developing stuff on cell phones,
doing remote debugging of them.
Unfortunately, the remote debugging stuff
doesn't work from OS X.
It works great on Windows,
but it actually does work.
It's just a little too shaky
for me to be comfortable with.
All right, there you are.
- Yeah.
All right,
so here's another little thing.
Here's an app.
One of the nice features
that NetBeans has got is a
bunch of stuff for profiling.
And I apologize, I've got a lot of stuff
loaded on this thing,
and it's spending a lot of time paging.
So you can profile all kinds of stuff.
Here I'm just going to do some
relatively generic profiling,
and I'm going to run the app.
And this app actually is
the slide program that I use
whenever I'm doing slides.
Page, page, page, page, page.
I can get a little disk drive going.
I've only got two gigs
of RAM on this thing.
Yeah, actually,
most of the memory is the app
that I'll show at the end.
And it, unfortunately, has a timer task.
So now it's instrumenting it
and starting up anytime soon.
Yes.
and I'm not using JDK 6.
JDK 6 actually makes a real difference.
So this is my little slide app.
So I'll just sort of play
around with it for a little bit.
All kinds of fun statistics
in the Java world.
We did 240 million
JRE downloads last year,
8 million downloads of the JDK.
That's for developers and that
counts like Morgan Stanley or
Lehman Brothers as one.
One of the nice things we do on
Windows is we've got bundling deals
with almost all of the manufacturers so
your customers don't have to download.
You know, they announced the 64-bit
support in the Mac OS,
in the Mac JVM just recently.
And it's actually been out for a while,
so don't worry about it.
It's actually very solid,
very mission critical.
And we actually qualify it
all to about 500 gigabytes.
One of the fun things that I've been
involved with is all the real-time work.
This is a really great chart.
You see here, there's a,
this is two app servers,
the real-time and the
non-real-time server.
The blue is the non-real-time,
and the horizontal axis is
kind of the response time.
And you can see that the real-time
app server completes almost all
requests in 2.4 milliseconds.
And there's actually two peaks here,
you can't really see it.
The other one's at 11 milliseconds,
which turns out to be a TCP bug.
But, you know,
getting those things all sort of down
there has been a really fun thing for us.
And of course, you know,
this stuff all works a
lot better in Mustang.
Now let's do a little bit of typing
to warm up our performance stats.
All right, so let's call that done.
Save before exiting.
No, I don't want to save that slide set.
And yes, I do want to see the profile.
So now we've seen what the
profiling has spit out for us.
There's the main thread.
There's a bunch of stuff that
spends doing initialization.
Here's actually where
things like painting happen.
And you can sort of do
all kinds of breakdown.
You can get an amazing amount
of detail to really see where
all your performance is going.
Um...
and others.
Thank you.
There you go.
The next thing I want to show
you is the Matisse editor.
This is the Matisse editor that
you've probably heard about.
One of the nice things that it does is
it doesn't use absolute positioning.
It gives you all the advantages
of all the dynamic positioning,
but it gives you a user experience that's
a lot like an absolute positioning thing.
And if you can see,
I don't know how well it's
showing up on the projectors,
but there's all these little sort of
vertical bars where it's showing you
the constraints that it's deriving.
It's deriving the constraints from all
the little bits and pieces that you drag.
This has the advantage that you
get this really easy experience,
and yet all of this responds correctly
when you do internationalization,
when you change labels
from Chinese to German,
or when you resize things.
It all works really smoothly.
Now, there are actually a few
slides I wanted to go through,
and we'll get back to that slide deck.
I wanted to talk a little bit about the
About some real-world applications,
I mean, Java is used out there for just
billions and billions of things.
You know,
my favorite one these days is still the
Brazilian national healthcare system.
You know, 120 million people,
every patient-caregiver interaction from,
you know,
from proctoscopies to taking your
temperature to filing a prescription.
You know, giant telescopes.
Most of the world's giant telescopes
are controlled by Java apps.
You know,
the JPL guys use it really heavily for,
like, the Mars Rover stuff.
You know,
the protein-folding world uses it.
All of eBay and Orbitz, you know,
they're giant Java apps.
And there are a lot of desktop
apps that have been showing up.
This is a few that I sort of gleaned
off the web in the last week or so.
Blurb.com is a fun one.
It's kind of like the book
publishing thing in iPhoto.
Except that it also works on Windows.
One of the nice things about doing
Java desktop apps is that you get all the
fun of developing and so forth on Apple.
But you're not cutting yourself
off from the Windows market.
Here's another one, Spring Medical.
They're a nice sort of charting company.
And here's a couple of
screenshots from there.
They do everything that
you need to run a hospital.
And this is basically
the Brazilian healthcare.
Healthcare system design.
Sort of,
except that it's done for the U.S.
So it does all the right U.S.
stuff.
And they very nicely support, you know,
both Windows and the Macintosh.
So you find doctor's offices using
this on the Mac as well as on Windows.
It's kind of whatever the
doctor's office wants to do.
It does things like patient charts.
One of the nice things that's been
happening in the Java world because,
you know, we do both, you know,
interesting desktop apps,
cell phone apps,
and infrastructure stuff,
is that you find a lot of companies are
kind of changing the way that they're
doing business around their software.
And one of my favorite examples
is my brother's company.
It's called Dirt.
Doing it right this time.
My brother's an industrial designer.
And they do furniture and wall systems.
And they started this company
a couple of years ago.
And they had the lovely advantage
of being able to design the product,
the business, and all the processes.
And software together.
So what they build is
walls kind of like this.
They're the only people around
that can build truly curved walls.
And not custom.
Just, you know, using standard parts.
And they have this app, which I'll...
I'll try to bring up here.
So their app is right here.
So their app looks kind of boring.
It's one where you can pick
different kinds of structures.
You can pick walls and you can draw
walls and it just puts the wall in.
Now what's going on here is actually
pretty interesting because there's
actually an expert system behind this
that has done all the figuring out of how
all the clips and connectors have to go,
how all of the structure of the
wall has to be put together.
If you draw walls at strange angles,
the expert system figures
out how the posts work.
And if you're running this on Windows,
unfortunately, because they did something
I really didn't like,
which is that they tied their,
they do real-time pricing.
So you can get real-time pricing
but only on Windows because they use
Internet Explorer and I've been beating
the crap out of them to get rid of that.
They don't need to do that.
Why they did it is beyond me.
So this looks vaguely like a lot of
the interior design apps that you see.
This has got a couple of
things that are different.
So is that the first time
these apps work on Mac OS?
Is that the first time
these apps work on Mac OS X?
In that design community,
finding people who use Macs
is actually pretty hard.
So the really interesting thing
I wanted to show is that they
actually use all of the OpenGL stuff,
all the Joggle support.
They use a 3D API called Zith,
which is one that was
designed for video games.
So now if I do something like that.
I think we have to cut this here.
Yeah, I just want to put a door in.
And, you know, it does all the AI stuff,
and it's really cool.
And they actually, you know,
there's a build button on this thing
that causes giant robot arms and
laser cutters to go into action.
They actually control
all the robots from it.
So thanks.
Thank you, James.
Great, great.
We stay in the trenches and we
sometimes forget about these great
applications being developed.
Let's move on to Java SE 6
and start with Sun's feature.
For Java C6.
As you've heard,
Java C6 is a codename Mustang,
and a Mustang can be a lot of
different things for different people.
Here it's a plane for Duke.
And I'd like to welcome
another person from Sun,
Scott Violet.
He's a client lead
architect and he has a demo.
He will demo IRIS,
a showcase of Java 6 features.
Thank you, Francois.
All right,
so a while back when I had contacted
Francois about speaking at WWDC,
I offered to speak about all
the wonderful and amazing
client features we've done to
really reinvigorate the client.
But you know what,
Francois is much better speaker.
He has that sexy Frenchman
accent that I can't compare with,
so I'm just going to focus on a demo.
So, you know, if you went to the keynote
like I suspect all of you did,
if you're like me,
you were blown away by the visuals
that the Time Machine app had.
It was just amazing to see sort
of dropping into this 3D view and,
you know, looping through things.
Wonderful use of 3D technology
to convey the point.
I suspect this is a good
indication of where,
you know,
all desktop applications are going to go.
And, you know,
the demo that I'm going to show nicely
fits in with that insofar as you can
do those effects with Java today.
Now, I don't have a lot of time,
so I'm just going to show
you a small portion of IRIS.
This IRIS demo is one that we
actually created at Java 1.
And you'll notice a lot of
use of these sort of 3D,
these animation effects,
sort of you'll get nice hover effects,
these subtle animation in and out.
You can go ahead and
type in and log in here.
Now, this application actually
does a number of things.
It's a sort of photo viewer,
but it's meant to be one.
That you can map out a particular
vacation that you went along
or a trip that you went along
and assign photos to that.
So, again, you can see, you know,
these nice transitions
that are going everywhere.
I mouse over,
I get these really nice effects.
And I just want to show
one aspect of this.
And, again, you know, mouse over here,
you get these nice zoom in, zoom out,
all extensive use of effects
all throughout this application.
But the one aspect I just want to
show here is the photo aspect of it.
And this is an application that will
allow me to put together a trip report
with photos going along the way,
but a key part of that is photo albums.
And this is actually pulling
data from Flickr right now,
so that's why in certain aspects of it,
it's a little chuggy,
just because we're sucking all this
data down from the web right now.
So one of the interesting things, again,
that I should mention
about this application,
it's a complete swing application.
The things that you have going on here,
you have JList up there, you have labels,
text areas, buttons,
they've all been customized,
but nonetheless,
they're just swing widgets.
So if I click on the Show button here,
I'll be dropped into a nice photo viewer.
And the photo viewer is making
extensive use of Joggle,
Java bindings for GL.
So I can go ahead and click,
and I can navigate through these,
zoom in to some particular photos,
go back and forth between them,
and et cetera.
So I think if you've seen how cool
the Time Machine application is,
there's no reason we can't do those
sort of things in Java applications.
And this is sort of a
small example of that.
If you're interested,
the source for this code,
the source for this application has all
been made on a Java.net application.
So if you are interested,
I'd encourage you to take a look there.
So I think at this point,
I'm going to hand it over to Francois,
who I'm sure will be
happy that I'm done early.
FRANCOIS CHOLLET: Oh, great.
Thank you.
Well, Mustang.
All the features you see on these screens
are covered in Scott's application,
or almost, hopefully.
And I'm going to go,
I don't understand half of them,
I'm just going to go
through a few of them.
On the desktop, core libraries features,
security and networking,
enterprise and XML,
VM and serviceability.
These are the five main areas.
The main desktop features, I believe,
is improved layout experience.
You also have a new swing worker
and drag-and-drop enhancements,
desktop APIs.
A lot of things have been going on there.
Core libraries improvements include
refinements to the concurrent
package for locking mechanisms,
compiler APIs and annotation processing.
This is for IDE developers mainly.
Scripting language APIs.
And Rhino JavaScript engine was
in and is now out of the betas.
On the security front,
a great improvement there is our
XML digital signatures for web services.
Smartcard I/O API.
Native JSS Kerberos integration
is something we've had
in J2SE 5 and Mac OS X,
and it's now included
by Sun in Java SE 6.
And an HTTP cookie manager,
we have had this in
WebObjects for a while,
and it's now part of J2SE 6.
So we'll make sure for these APIs we
will align to Sun's way of doing things.
On the enterprise front,
the XML parsing packages,
the database connectivity package,
and the Java management
extensions have been revved up.
And there is a new database,
a pure Java database called Derby that
has been added to the latest betas.
And it's coming from
the open source world,
and we will try to take
advantage of it in WebObjects.
VM features, last but not least,
VM features.
Performance improvements through faster
class verification and compilers.
VM Attach and Demand for
debugging systems in production.
You do not need to have special options,
to type special options when
you start your production system
to be able to attach to the VM.
And new VM tools: Remote Stack Analysis,
Java Heap Analysis, and very important,
DTrace.
Now, these were some features
improvement for Java SE 6.
On top of that,
we have a lot of Leopard changes,
and we want to take advantage
of them in Java SE 6.
As always, Java is built on top
of Core OS frameworks.
There is pretty much a one-to-one mapping
between Mac OS X core frameworks or
core libraries and Java's feature set.
For example,
Print Services is used for Java printing,
Cocoa is used for AWT,
Quartz for Java 2D, and so on.
Cocoa Component.
If you're tired of the
look of Sun's color picker,
why not use
and Mac OS X look and feel
and our own color chooser.
If you do not want to
implement your own font picker,
why not use Mac OS X font picker?
You do not have to type any code,
you just embed it in your
Java application through the
embedded Cocoa components system.
And here you go.
Bundling applications.
So there's a correct way to bundle
an application and a messy way
to distribute an application.
The messy way is on Windows.
The correct application
bundle is on Mac OS X.
If you do this, you will be able to drop
your application in the dock,
keep it nice and clean,
and it will bounce and have all
the Genie effects that you want.
You'll be able to drag and drop to it.
Please use Jarbundler.
It's your friend.
New Aqua support.
There's the new and the not so new.
For a while,
we've had Aqua everywhere in Java.
This means that you get
for free screen menu bars,
AWT widgets,
and swing Aqua look and feel.
And again, as I said earlier,
anti-aliasing is a default
for text rendering.
It just works.
Extended AWT,
there are many hot Mac OS X features
that cannot be implemented in pure Java.
So we have extended AWT to
give you access to a set of
Mac OS X application events.
And this is mostly for Doc on Finder,
Drag on Drop, also to intercept
application menu callbacks,
such as quit, preferences, about events.
You can intercept them and put your own
Java code in your Java applications.
New this year is Extended Swing.
You now have alternate window
styles at your disposition.
There's a handful of them and also small
and mini Aqua controls to populate them.
And as well, we added sheets.
I'd like to welcome Mike Swingle
on stage to demo these features.
Thank you Francois.
So for my demo here,
I've constructed a small little
application that represents like a
palette for a document window for
something that you'd see in pages.
And I've launched this in Java 1.5
without our extended swing
features that we're working on.
And it's okay.
It's Java.
Just, you know, little Aqua controls,
standard size and stuff.
But to really make it look right,
what we want to do is actually
make it look like a real palette.
We'll enable the small title bar for
the window that most palettes have.
We'll change the size variant of
the controls to miniature style.
And just for fun,
I want to show you the sheets as well.
So this is what the new
Aqua look and feel looks like.
This is what the new Aqua look
and feel looks like with
mini controls in Java 1.6.
There's a world of difference.
We automatically set the font
for you and the preferred size.
All the pop-ups just automatically scale.
And something that you've
wanted for a long time,
sheets.
So we look forward to seeing some
new and exciting swing applications
that look more at home on Mac OS X.
Francois?
Thank you, Mike.
This is great.
I think I'll call you
back on stage later.
Clive?
OK,
let's move on to graphics improvements.
You now have the choice
on Mac OS X Java SE 6.
You have a choice of
different graphics engines.
Forever we've had the
Quartz graphics engine.
We have added last year
the Sun 2D renderer,
which is another
software graphics engine.
And this year,
we're adding the OpenGL graphics engine,
which is taking advantage of the
OpenGL hardware acceleration.
This is an effort that
was spearheaded by Sun.
And since we have a great
OpenGL library on Mac OS X,
we have been able to leverage it.
You're going to see great
performance improvement from this.
But as always, your mileage may vary.
So I encourage you to go to the
Java graphics and performance
session at 9:00 AM on Thursday.
Java 3D on Joggle, what's behind there?
Java 3D used to be a very
thin layer of Java on top of
a lot of native drawing code.
This is changing with Java 3D 1.5.
It is now based on Joggle.
And since Joggle is also available on
Mac OS X and Java 3D is now pure Java,
Java 3D on Joggle will be
available on Sun's website.
Resolution Independence Support.
It will not be in
Java SE until version 7,
and that's a statement.
But we have to do something for Leopard.
You will have great
default layout behavior:
sharp text, sharp controls,
and sharp AWT drawing.
Since we cannot add developer
APIs for resolution independence,
your images and your layout
will be scaled accordingly.
And I think demo speaks
better than text here.
So I'll call Mike again.
Thanks, Francois.
Thank you, Francois.
So what I'm doing with--
So to come up with a demo here,
I thought, well, you know,
I could make something kind of contrived,
or I could just take a real-world,
unmodified application and
bring it up with our resolution
independence and see how it works.
So what we're doing here,
we're just going to go to Quartz
Debug and just ratchet it up
to 2.0 and see what happens.
So it's launching right now.
The window positioning and
coordinate stuff is still
something that we're working on.
But as you can see, in high res,
all of the text is crisp
and clear and sharp.
All of the rounded rectangles
for these tabs here,
all the Java 2D drawing
for the code collapse,
it's sharp and crystal clear
when we have a screen that
actually has a lot more pixels.
Unfortunately,
I can't show you because our monitors
are only fixed resolution here.
You'll notice that the images are scaled,
but they're not any different
than what you would normally
see at a 1.0 scale factor,
72 DPI, on a regular screen.
The real story here is it just works.
You know, and you shouldn't have to
change a single line of code.
Well, it's going to be great to have
so many pixels to play with.
Back when I started
tinkering with computers,
we were building icons with 8 bytes.
And now in 8 bytes,
we're putting a pointer.
This is 64-bit programming,
and with Java, it just works.
I am able to reuse a
slide from last year.
We use this slide for
the transition to Intel,
and we're using it this
year for Java 64-bit.
There is a little asterisk here,
and the little asterisk stands
for the usual disclaimer.
It's only for Intel processors.
You have to run your Java applications
with the Java SE6 server 64-bit VM.
And of course, if you have JNI libraries,
you have to recompile
them for Intel 64-bit.
But mostly, everything works.
And you can trust us.
You've heard James Gosling saying
how far this had been tested.
It works.
So what does this give you?
It blows away the 4GB heap barrier.
It allows more larger objects
in multidimensional arrays.
And with Java,
you get the full Java stack,
including the graphics.
This means that you do not have to
divide your application between a client
32-bit to draw the results of your
simulation and your actual simulator.
You can put everything in one
process and have both drawing and
simulation going simultaneously.
Who is this for?
Well,
they are consumers of huge data sets,
like the iTunes music store
that want to have the database
of all of its songs in memory,
and other examples are gene
sequencing applications.
You also have the producers
of huge datasets like NASA,
NOAA, petroleum engineering simulations,
and so on.
For you,
if you're not in these categories,
you need to evaluate on
a per application basis.
So there's a possible performance cost.
If I go back to the benchmark
that I showed earlier,
you will see that Java 64-bit is
trailing slightly behind Java 32-bit.
And this is still-- this is very early.
We just got it running
within the last month.
And it is still among the best
performers of all the industry in 64-bit.
If I drill down in this particular
benchmark to the sub-benchmark,
you will see that there are some of
the mathematical operations like fast
Fourier transforms that are much faster,
other ones that are slower,
and it really depends on whether your
algorithm is able to take advantage
of the increased number of registers.
There are also fixes coming in
from both Sun and Apple that
should improve these numbers.
I'd like to welcome on stage
people from Agilent Technologies,
Peter Eastman and Mihailo Despotovic,
to show us GinSpring.
Thank you.
So we want to talk about GeneSpring GX,
which is an application for
analyzing data from gene
expression microarray experiments.
So this is a technology that has
become very popular in the last decade.
And what it allows you to do is to
take some kind of a biological sample,
like a blood sample or a tissue
sample or maybe a cell culture,
and you can take a snapshot of
what every single gene is doing
in that sample at one moment.
And then you can repeat this
for a lot of different samples.
Like maybe you want to look at
a lot of different individuals,
or maybe some people who have a
disease and others who are healthy,
or people who have been given a drug
and other people who haven't been.
And so you then take all of this
data from all these microarrays,
and this can produce
really a lot of data,
easily hundreds of millions of numbers.
And if you just look at it,
it's just sort of this
mess of lines on a graph.
And so the goal of GeneSpring GX is
to help you analyze this data in
many different ways and try to figure
out what it means and get to some
sort of understanding of the biology.
Now just to make things worse,
the microarray technology
is advancing very,
very quickly.
So this data set that you see up here
was generated with a kind of microarray
that measures about 55,000 genes.
And about two years ago,
that was considered a
really big microarray.
But today, there are already ones on the
market that measure hundreds of
thousands of gene transcripts,
and that number is just going
to be increasing in the future.
All right, thanks Peter.
And as Peter already implied,
the GeneSpring, our application,
has to deal with huge data sets.
Unfortunately, sometimes when you deal
with huge data sets,
we run into problems.
So some of our algorithms try
to compensate for the barriers
imposed by 32-bit JVMs by swapping
data to disk and swapping it back,
which then slows down the computation.
And sometimes you can't even execute the
computation because you really need to
have some chunk of data in the memory.
And if you can't have that in memory,
you'll just pop up an
error message saying,
sorry, we cannot execute.
Some of these algorithms are not designed
to swap in data for various reasons.
And in that case...
This is something you
might see in our program.
And in this particular case,
user tried to calculate and construct
the gene tree with this same data set,
so it's more than 50,000 genes.
Unfortunately, the user didn't have
enough memory for this,
and we cannot just let
this algorithm run.
We cannot just throw out of
memory exception because JVM will
be in an inconsistent state.
User might not save some data.
It might be very bad.
So we actually tried to estimate how
much memory the algorithm is going
to need to finish the calculation.
In this particular case, unfortunately,
that amount of memory
was about 6 gigabytes,
which is over the 4 gigabyte limit.
And the user had about 2
gigabytes on this machine.
And this is an unfortunate message,
but however,
When we ran this in 64-bit JVM,
the message didn't show up,
the calculation started,
and the user eventually
will get its results.
So, an important thing to emphasize here
is that the difference between program
running in the 64-bit JVM on this slide
and the program running on this slide
inside 32 JVM really doesn't exist.
So, it's the same jar,
as a matter of fact, same classes,
no recompilation, nothing.
Of course, it's Java,
and it just confirms what Francois said,
that it just works.
It works better, actually.
So, there are only two things which
are done to produce this slide.
First of all, 64-bit JVM was started,
so it was given a hint to JVM that
it should start in 64-bit mode.
And we, of course, had to adjust the heap
size for the application,
because the original heap size was still
less than required by this algorithm.
So, this is just one small data point.
We consider this as a tip of an iceberg.
It's, GeneSpring is also just one of
our applications we produce,
and we are expecting more applications
coming on the very similar engine,
and eventually they are all going
to benefit from 64-bit JVM on Apple.
So, which will eventually
make our customers happy,
and that's eventually our goal.
So, with this I would conclude,
and thank you very much.
Now back to the main presentation.
Thank you, Mihailo.
So as a summary,
here are the restrictions for
VM flavors on both architectures.
Java EC6 previews.
The server 32 and 64-bit will
only be available on Intel.
J2SE 5, the 32-bit VM,
will only be available on Intel.
And Java 1.4 is for client only.
For more details,
go to the Java VM session,
which is Thursday at 10:30 AM.
Java 1.3, let's not spend much time on
Java 1.3 because it's dead.
It's gone.
It's not on your Leopard CD.
Rest in peace, Java 1.3.
Java 1.4, well,
it's following very closely
the sad story of Java 1.3.
Move to Java 5 now.
You've been warned.
The Java bridge,
it served its purpose over
its 10 years lifespan.
It's time to retire it.
All the Cocoa Java APIs have
been deprecated.
Use JNI.
And the Xcode templates
have been removed from Lepl.
Let's move on to
IDE support on the platform.
The three main third-party
tools are Eclipse,
NetBeans, and IntelliJ IDEA.
We have already seen NetBeans.
Eclipse has its own session.
I have a couple slides on Eclipse though.
The important thing this quarter is that
Eclipse 3.2 was released on Mac OS X,
and with it we had a joint effort to fix
and improve the AWT/SWT interoperability.
This means that plugins can embed
AWT components in SWT windows,
and there shouldn't be any pure
Java plugin that does not work
out of the box on Mac OS X.
The cave-out is that there are
still some remaining AWT threading
combinations that may deadlock,
and we are chasing them.
Some plugins with native code are
not yet available on Mac OS X,
so you should put pressure on your
plugin provider to support our platform.
There's no reason not to do so.
Let's have a demo of IDEA.
I'd like to welcome Ben Galbraith,
who is a member of the
IntelliJ advisory board.
Yes, sorry.
You don't need that.
[Transcript missing]
You guys don't mind, do you?
Five minutes and 30 seconds,
let's do that.
Okay,
so what I want to do in the next five
minutes and 25 seconds is actually
show you coding this timer application
from scratch in my code editor.
And actually,
I did a couple of rehearsals--oops,
sorry.
That was stupid.
I'll set it to 550.
I did a couple of rehearsals,
and I can't do the entire thing from
scratch in five minutes and 15 seconds.
But I can do a little bit of it,
and as I do that, I want to show you the
experience of coding in IntelliJ.
So let's start a new class file.
I'll call it My Timer.
And let's get going.
The first feature I want to show
you is what we call live templates.
With live templates,
you just type an abbreviation
and hit the tab key,
and it expands some code out from that.
Now,
this was a simple static code insertion.
It's actually fairly sophisticated,
where you can have parameters.
It can actually look at the surrounding
state of your code and figure out what
possible parameter values are and things.
But I'm just doing a simple one there.
And now, I need to create a J frame
to actually display.
I'm going to display my timer.
And if you notice--sorry,
I'm not used to this keyboard.
I'm fat fingering all over the place.
IntelliJ automatically handled
the import of the J frame.
And in fact, if I get rid of it,
it can automatically get
rid of the J frame import.
and others.
Thank you for watching.
- Well, it turns out there's an exception
here that I need to handle.
If you notice to the left,
you see the little light bulb here,
IDEA also has a feature
called intention actions,
where we try and figure out what
you're trying to do in a given
context and just do it for you.
In this case,
we have a number of options that
we figure you might wanna do here,
and one of these options is adding the
exception to the method definition,
to the method signature.
I also want to assign the result
of this invocation to a variable.
IDEA supports what are
called refactoring.
Refactoring is a big trend
in our industry right now.
In fact, Xcode just got support for it,
which is great.
Refactorings are automated
changes across your code base.
One refactoring that IDEA supports
is just inserting a variable
where there wasn't one previously.
And so I can insert a variable and
IntelliJ automatically looks at
the return type and figures out
that I might wanna call it model.
I could also call it form model if
I like a little bit more verbosity,
and it automatically inserts that for me.
This feature is so effective that
I actually find that I don't even write
the left-hand side of my code a lot,
I just rely on this and
just insert the variable.
And now that I have my variable,
I want to go ahead and
create the top level panel.
Notice actually when I do
the code completion here,
I just type in C and hit the
code completion shortcut.
And that time it actually didn't work,
but typically it will highlight the
last method that you invoked because
it keeps track of all the methods you
invoke and just tries to figure out
which one you're likely to want to do.
And now I'm gonna go ahead
and get my content pane and
add this panel definition.
And so now I have a GUI,
but I'm not really done yet because
I need to add some behaviors to it.
And so let me go ahead and do that.
And I'm gonna get references to a
couple of components that are in my UI.
And I can just type some abbreviations
of these methods and IntelliJ will
automatically expand those out for me.
So you can actually find when
you use all these features,
the number of keystrokes that you use,
goes down tremendously.
I'm getting pretty old in years and this
is useful for me because I actually have
a lot of repetitive stress symptoms.
And so I find when I use IntelliJ,
I can actually code a lot less
in terms of number of keystrokes,
which for me is kind of important.
Now I want to add a listener
to my button for my behaviors.
IntelliJ has another feature where we
actually will list all the different
classes in your class leader domain that
implement the listener contract that
you're currently trying to implement.
So these are all the action
listeners in my application.
Here I'm gonna choose one.
And now that I have my action listener,
I need to prevent reentry in my timer.
So I'm gonna set the button to enable.
It marks a squiggly line because,
as you probably know,
I need to have references inside
of inner classes marked as final.
It does that for me with
an intention action.
And now I need to do a
couple of other things.
I need to get the text that the
user entered from that field.
And I'm gonna have to mark
that text field final.
I'm gonna use my
refactoring to get the text.
And I'm also going to
auto-import my timer utils class,
which is a shortcut that lets
me cheat because it's a bunch of
pre-written code that I just didn't
have time to do live in front of you.
And I'm gonna introduce a variable here,
countdown seconds.
And I'm not gonna make it, am I?
Let's see.
Start long equals system
current utils milliseconds.
And I just have a couple more lines left.
So now I need to do the loop where
we actually count down the seconds.
Start long.
How am I doing, Francois?
Do I got a couple more seconds?
Can you give me a couple more seconds?
And let's see.
I need the label here.
I'm gonna have to mark that as final.
And ooh, at the very end,
I need to set my button back enabled.
True.
All right.
So that's basically all I wanted to do.
Are there any obvious problems here?
One obvious problem is that
I have this loop on the UI thread.
So before I wrap up,
I just need to put that
onto a background thread.
I'm gonna use the surround with feature.
It's another feature of IntelliJ.
Oops,
I didn't mean to access that feature.
I was turning to mark this as final.
And the right keystroke, yeah.
And now new thread, runnable.
Start.
And OK.
So we've got-- and there's just one
tiny little additional thing that
I'm not gonna have time to fix.
I have to put this
back on the AWT thread.
But I wanted to show you that
IntelliJ actually keeps track of all
your to-dos in a central location.
So you can go back and look at it
and see that you need to solve this.
And now I can just right
click on my main method.
And with any luck,
the demo will actually work.
So that's ideal.
Thank you.
Any closing statement?
No, I'll do it.
Thanks, Ben.
Great.
Let's not let this eclipse Xcode.
It's our own Java development tool.
It's the one we're using in my team.
And the reason we're using it is because
it's the best tool to do cross-language
development if you're doing Java,
C, Objective-C, C++ side by side.
It has all the goodies of a modern IDE,
including integrated debugging,
code sense, no-call power edit.
What we added this year
are new end templates,
and I encourage new developers,
students to start here.
Teams can now use multiple
IDEs and build in harmony.
You could have half of
your team using Eclipse,
half of your team using Xcode,
and half of your team using IDEA.
and the other way around.
Other Mac OS X tools
available on the platform.
Well, you have Terminal, Emacs, VI.
For building and deploying,
I already talked about JAR bundler.
Shark will be demoed in
our performance session,
or Java graphics and performance session.
Quartz Debug as well
will be showcased there.
What I'd like to show you now is X-Ray.
X-Ray is our new profiling tool.
I'd like to welcome Lynn on stage.
She needs a few more minutes to
showcase X-Ray support for Java.
In our Java VM session,
we will also show you the new command
line profiling tool called Dtrace.
It's coming from Sun and it's working
great on Mac OS X and Leopard.
So I really encourage you to go see it.
And I'm off, so Lynn is here.
Thank you, Francois.
So I'm going to show you,
yesterday you've probably seen how
X-Ray works in profiling your tools.
So I'm going to show you today
how to use it to profile Java.
So right here I have X-Ray and as
you can see I have my instruments
down here at the bottom.
So I'm going to select my
CPU load tool and drag it up
here and my Java thread tool.
And in order to start it,
I'm going to click play.
And, okay, I'm probably going to
have to run this again.
Okay, once again, I'm going to start with
dragging the CPU load up here.
and then my Java Thread tool.
And I'm going to get
rid of the UI recorder,
so just going to minimize it.
and I'm going to click play.
And I'm going to select
a Java demo application,
which is Java 2D,
and I'm going to open it.
And as you can see,
I can view the results of my
sampling at the same time.
[Transcript missing]
All right,
it seems to be stuck on something,
so let me just try this again.
So, yeah, once again,
let me just put in my
CPU load and my Java thread.
I'll click Play.
All right,
so it seems that all the fooling
around with the number of processors
and other demos have sort of messed
up the setup that I had before.
But anyway, I'm just going to return
this back to Francois.
Sorry.
Keep going, I have a few more slides
you can... Alright.
Keep trying.
I'll move on to the next slide, please.
We have a few more minutes,
so we're fine on time.
Hopefully you can get back to this.
For more information on Java,
please attend the sessions
we have this week.
We have seven,
I'd say five more sessions on Java,
four more sessions on Java,
two more sessions on WebObjects,
and a feedback forum
joined for both of them.
Documentation, sample code,
you should get all your
information for this URL.
We want your feedback.
Please follow us after
this session to the labs.
We have a feedback forum.
And emails,
send your emails to Alan Samuel,
not to me.
Even though I'm listed,
you can talk to me afterwards.
And Lynn is still trying.
- Oh, it works.
- Coming, okay.
Back to demo?
- Yeah.
[Transcript missing]
It actually shows me the threads
that are running at the same time
that I'm actually playing around
with my Java 2D demo application.
And so my thread instrument's right here,
and I'm going to stop sampling right now.
I mean,
I'm going to stop running the profiling.
and zoom out a little bit
so you can see the threads.
And as you can see,
we have all the threads that
were currently running up here.
And the names are up here and
threads that are running are green.
Threads that are waiting are in
yellow and threads that are blocked,
I'm going to zoom in a little bit,
you can see are red.
And you can see in this situation,
the main thread and the AWT event
queue are blocked in some cases.
So I'm going to scrub over here to see
this interesting region and I'm going
to click on the info button right here.
So as you can see,
my more detailed view shows
me the names of the threads
that are currently running.
And it tells me their priorities,
whether they're daemon or not,
and their state.
And the most interesting
threads are the main thread,
which is blocked, and the event queue.
And I could click on those threads
and look at more extended detail,
which actually shows me the
stack trace of those threads.
And the monitors that they own,
so you could actually tell
what they're blocked on.
And I could also go back
to the Java Threads view
and as I change the time,
it actually scrubs along.
So I'm just going to go back to where
it's blocked and click the info button.
And you could actually scrub along
this way and your stack trace
actually changes at the same time.
So I hope you all use this tool
to profile your Java applications.
And back to you, Francois.
Thank you Lynn.
This is the first,
but hopefully just the first,
plugin we will develop for
Java profiling on X-Ray.